=========================================================
Support SSL for OpenStack endpoints and Fuel Master node
=========================================================

https://blueprints.launchpad.net/fuel/+spec/ssl-endpoints

OpenStack public endpoints that provide APIs on public networks need to
operate over SSL. Also some components on master node need to operate
over SSL.

Problem description
===================

OpenStack services receive requests from public networks that are untrusted
area. As the network path between the end-users and the OpenStack services is
untrusted, encryption is required to ensure confidentiality.

We achieve this by implementing Secure Sockets Layer as recommended in the
OpenStack security guide.

Fuel master node after installation also operates via unsecure protocols only.
We can achieve more security using access to Fuel UI via SSL.

Proposed change
===============

OpenStack services can be configured to use SSL/TLS libraries. We propose to
modify the puppet manifests to be able to use SSL/TLS and HTTP services.

This blueprint will focus on HTTP services that provide API endpoints on
public networks. The configuration of HAProxy will also be modified to enable
SSL for Horizon. Endpoints used for management and other services like
messaging will not be done in this blueprint.

We will use HAProxy and its support of SSL. The endpoints of public URLs
will be configured with the IP or the name of the HAProxy. It will handle
incoming SSL connections, decryption of the SSL and passing the unencrypted
request to the corresponding service. That means that the communication
between the proxy and the endpoints will not be encrypted.

In this specification we are making the assumption that non HA deployment
is deprecated and Fuel support deploying a single HA mode as descibed here:
https://blueprints.launchpad.net/fuel/+spec/single-controller-ha
That means that we consider that HAProxy is deployed for all configurations or
if it is not the case, it will not be compatible with SSL.

Here is a schema of the encryption of the traffic paths:

  1. Between client and OpenStack services:

    ::

                  +-------+    +---------------------+    +------+
      Client +----+ HTTPS +----+ public API endpoint +----+ HTTP |
                  +-------+    +---------------------+    +--+---+
                                                             |
                                                             v
                                                        OSt service

  2. Between OpenStack services:

    ::

                      +------+   +-----------------------+   +------+
      OSt service +---+ HTTP +---+ internal API endpoint +---+ HTTP |
                      +------+   +-----------------------+   +--+---+
                                                                |
                                                                v
                                                           OSt service

It is recommended that an OpenStack service communicate to another OpenStack
service by using the internal API endpoint. Fuel is following this best
practice. If we find a service that is not using the management network to
communicate with another one we should file a bug about this and reconfigure
it to use the internal API endpoint.

Here are the different steps needed to implement SSL with public API
endpoints:

- Install at least the version 1.5.0 of HAProxy because the support of
  SSL is available since this version. As it is not available in Ubuntu (and
  probably it is the same for CentOS) we will need to rebuild it.
  https://bugs.launchpad.net/fuel/+bug/1346365/
  https://review.openstack.org/#/c/147858/
  https://review.openstack.org/#/c/147860/

- Configure HAProxy to manage SSL connections and to forward the request to
  the corresponding service. Also configure Keystone over https
  https://review.openstack.org/#/c/186498/

- When an OpenStack service queries another OpenStack service it must use the
  internal API endpoint. If it's not possible, the service needs to be
  configured with the appropriate SSL certificate.

- We will use a self-signed certificate by default. In terms of encryption it
  is the same than other certificates. Self-signed certificates aren't less
  "secure" but end-users have to assume that they are genuine. If we don't
  want to use self-signed certificate generated by Fuel, the customer will
  have to provide it before deploying the cluster. And to generate the
  certificate, the customer needs to know the public VIP address (or name).
  We will use openssl to manage them so that means that we will add a
  dependency to openssl if it is not already the case. So, we need a field
  in UI page to which user can put DNS name for CN field in certificate.

- We need self-sign keys generation code
  https://review.openstack.org/#/c/186035/
  https://review.openstack.org/#/c/186015/

- As we are using a self-signed certificate we need to ensure that OpenStack
  services behave in the same way with a self-signed certificate and a
  CA certificate. As an example, web browser opens a warning window if you
  are using a self-signed certificate and not if you are using a certificate
  issued by a trusted authority (ie a CA that is installed in your browser's
  certificate manager).

- Even if encrypted communications with a self-signed certificate are a better
  solution than plain text ones we can not force a user to use a self-signed
  certificate. By default we will enable SSL but must give the possibility to
  the user to disable it. It can be a checkbox in Fuel UI to "disable SSL for
  public endpoints" that needs to be checked to disable SSL.
  https://review.openstack.org/#/c/186706/

- After cluster deployment we should provide to the user right link to Horizon if it
  was deployed with https support

- In case of "real" HA where several HAProxy are deployed. We need to be able
  to distribute the certificate. The self-signed certificate will be generated
  by *astute* prehook  and stored somewhere on the fuel master. Then the
  certificate will be distributed to all nodes that run HAProxy through a
  mechanism like *upload_file*. The certificate is related to a cluster
  because it is valid for a given virtual IP. So if a controller is added to
  the cluster we just reuse the certificate already generated at the creation
  of the cluster and stored on the fuel master node.

- As SSL certificates are sensitive data we should be certain that they are not
  stored in logs or in a database in case of diagnostic snapshot.

- OTSF tests shoud be fixed to operate over SSL


Fuel master node should operate over SSL. To achieve this, we should point
UI web server to operate over HTTPS. Also some master components can use
SSL by default.


Alternatives
------------

#. Enable SSL for all OpenStack services.

   Cons:
      - API services need to respond quickly and SSL handshake can add a
        significant overhead. Python services do not work well with direct SSL
        integration.
      - You need to manage as many certificates as there are services. The
        problem is even more difficult when services are spread on different
        nodes as it is often the case.

   Pros:
      - It enables SSL on both, public and internal APIs. That means that we
        don't need to be concerned with which endpoint is being used by each
        OpenStack service.

Data model impact
-----------------

None

REST API impact
---------------

The management of certificate with the REST API is not in the scope of this
specification.

Upgrade impact
--------------

If the updated environment does not use SSL before the update, it will not
use SSL after the update.

In the same way we will not support downgrade from SSL to non-SSL.

Security impact
---------------

By using SSL/TLS over HTTP services, we will be able to provide a secure
system with authentication (but it is not the case currently since you need
a certificate generated by a CA) and confidentiality.

Notifications impact
--------------------

We need to notify that deployment is done and so you need to open your
Horizon at https:// instead of http://

We need to notify that a self-signed certificate is used for SSL encryption.

We also need to notify where the certificate that contains the public key that
is used by client can be downloaded. It can be done by showing the link to the
certificate in the UI. This certificate can be used by OpenStack clients.

Other end user impact
---------------------

SSL is enabled by default.

As we are using a self-signed certificate by default, if a user is using a
web browser to query OpenStack services there will be a popup to warn than
the certificate can not be trusted.

Performance Impact
------------------

The SSL-overhead is generally small. The major cost of HTTPS is the SSL
handshaking so depending the typical session length and the caching behavior
of clients the overhead may be different. For very short sessions you can see
performance issue.

The internal communications between services involved many API calls for
small tasks and this is why we will not implement SSL endpoints for the
management network. OpenStack services need to be configure properly.

Other deployer impact
---------------------

OpenStack services will only use internal/admin URLs. Thus we must be sure
that all services can communicate through the management network.

The work flow is to deploy the cluster with a self-signed certificate that was
generated by astute at the creation of the cluster. This certificate must
be stored somewhere on the fuel master node with the appropriate rights. When
the cluster is created, if it is available (it is not in the scope of this
specification) the user can download its own certificate for the given VIP.
If it cannot download it or don't want to use another certificate then
everything will work fine with the self-signed certificate.

Developer impact
----------------

OSTF team (health check team) is going to be affected by changing
OpenStack endpoints.

Implementation
==============

Assignee(s)
-----------

Primary assignee:
- sbogatkin

Feature Lead:
- assignee of this blueprint

Mandatory Design Reviewers:
- Mike Scherbatov

Developers:
- Stanislaw Bogatkin


QA: ?

Work Items
----------

stage 1
~~~~~~~

- Generate a certificate from Fuel that will be used for authentication.
  It can be self-signed.

- We need to provide the possibility to the user to deactivate SSL if he
  doesn't want to use the one generated by Fuel.

- Install HAProxy and configure it to handle SSL connections and forward
  requests to the corresponding service.

- Check that the following services are configured to use internal URL
  for communicating with other OpenStack services.

    - ceilometer
    - ceph
    - cinder
    - glance
    - heat
    - horizon
    - keystone
    - murano
    - neutron
    - nova
    - sahara
    - swift

- If the user want to use its own certificate we need to give him such
  ability. Also we should provide a document about how he can manually
  install his own certificate for SSL endpoints.

- Generate SSL keypair for master node nginx and apply it. Plain HTTP
  mode should be retained for backward compatibility.

stage 2
~~~~~~~

- Use a PKI described in the following blueprint:
  https://blueprints.launchpad.net/fuel/+spec/ca-deployment

- Wrap Keystone and RabbitMQ on master over SSL

Dependencies
============

- openssl
- haproxy >= 1.5

Testing
=======

Build a new fuel ISO and test if the deployment corresponds to what is
expected. We need to check with the QA team how the modification of endpoint
will affect them. We need their approbation here.

Documentation Impact
====================

As we will generate a certificate to allow the usage of SSL for
API public endpoints, we need to document how to get the certificate that
contains the public key to identify the service if an end-user want to use a
CLI (for example nova CLI) to interact with OpenStack services.

If the user wants to use its own certificate we need to describe where and how
it can manually upload its certificate.

We need to add a warning that if she/he uploads a certificate, she/he must
manage the expiration date of the certificate.

References
==========

- https://blueprints.launchpad.net/fuel/+spec/ssl-endpoints
- https://blueprints.launchpad.net/fuel/+spec/single-controller-ha
- https://bugs.launchpad.net/fuel/+bug/1346365
- http://docs.openstack.org/security-guide/content/ch020_ssl-everywhere.html
- https://help.ubuntu.com/community/OpenSSL
- http://blog.haproxy.com/2012/09/10/how-to-get-ssl-with-haproxy-getting-rid-of-stunnel-stud-nginx-or-pound/
