..
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported
 License.

 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode

======================================
Separate MOS packages from CentOS ones
======================================

https://blueprints.launchpad.net/fuel/+spec/separate-mos-from-centos

--------------------
Problem description
--------------------

* As a Cloud Operator I would like to see what RPM packages are provided by
  Mirantis OpenStack and what RPM packages are provided by base distro

* As a Cloud Operator I would like to get security updates as fast as possible
  independently for base distro as well as for Mirantis OpenStack

* As a Package Maintainer I would like to keep track of sources to all
  Mirantis OpenStack packages and minimize the number of modified ones as much
  as possible

----------------
Proposed changes
----------------

Web UI
======

None

Nailgun
=======

Data model
----------

None

REST API
--------

None

Orchestration
=============

RPC Protocol
------------

None

Fuel Client
===========

None

Plugins
=======

None

Fuel Library
============

* Fuel Puppet manifests have to be adjusted to support CentOS 7 deployments

------------
Alternatives
------------

There is no alternative to the repositories separation approach due to
considerations related to distribution policies of major OS vendors.
Regarding the helper script to download base distro repositories, there
could be a different approach implemented, by downloading only particular
packages that required by MOS. However, we consider that providing a full
upstream repository would make customer experience a bit better, especially
in cases when additional upstream packages that are not a part of MOS need
to be installed).

--------------
Upgrade impact
--------------

When Fuel master node is upgraded to a version that supports Linux distro
separation, package repositories for old versions of MOS deployed by previous
version of Fuel will keep using the old mirror structure. Package repositories
for the new versions of MOS will use the structure defined in the
mos-rpm-repos-iface_ specification.

.. _mos-rpm-repos-iface: https://github.com/stackforge/fuel-specs/blob/master/specs/7.0/mos-rpm-repos-iface.rst

---------------
Security impact
---------------

None

--------------------
Notifications impact
--------------------

None

---------------
End user impact
---------------

None

------------------
Performance impact
------------------

None

-----------------
Deployment impact
-----------------

Changes described in this document allow to increase product flexibility,
by making possible to choose an operating system and install it independent
of MOS.

----------------
Developer impact
----------------

None

--------------------------------
Infrastructure impact
--------------------------------

* The mixed repository that contains both upstream OS and MOS RPM packages
  ("fwm") will be no longer propagated across the MOS mirrors.

* Jobs for creating a product ISO will be modified to reflect changes to the
  repositories structure

--------------------
Documentation impact
--------------------

None

-------------------------------
Package versioning requirements
-------------------------------

Package version string, as well as package metadata for a *MOS specific* or
*divergent* package must not include registered trademarks of base distro
vendors, and should include "mos" keyword.

-----------------------
RPM packages versioning
-----------------------

Package name constructs from::

    <name>-<version>-<release>

For example::

    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7

Where:

- python-iso8601 - name
- 0.1.10 - version
- 1.el7 - release

All modifications should be made in release section.

**1** - first digits in *release* represents actual package revision/release
number and should be incremented in case of package update(spec modification,
patching etc).

Example::

    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7 -> python-iso8601-0.1.10-2.el7

**el7** - represents distribution that was used during package building
process and generated by %{?dist} macro. For packages maintained by MOS special
suffix must be add after %{?dist} macro which represents *MOS release* during
package build process.

Example::

    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7 -> python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.1

**Options/tags should be modified by CI/Build:**

Below provided example with options from python-iso8601.spec file::

    Name:           python-iso8601
    Version:        0.1.10
    Release:        1%{?dist}

CI/Build system should modify *Version:* and *Release:* values before build
process to ensure that package version and release represents truth:

- *Version:* for **OpenStack projects** must be substituted with last tag
  in code branch from where package will be built.
- *Release:* value should be preserved and concatenated with MOS specific
  attributes.

Example::

    was:    Release:        1%{?dist}
    became: Release:        1%{?dist}~mosX.X.X

This modification leads to transformations as follows::

    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7 -> python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.1

**Subsequent version:**

This number represents amount of commits into code since last tag change in
current code branch and must be added after **mosX.X**.

Example::

    python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.123 -> python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.124

**Structure of release part for packages maintained by Mirantis:**

python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.%{?dist}~mos8.0.1
Where:

- ~ separator from base Linux distro version
- mosX.X - X.X represents major and minor version of MOS release.
- 3rd X - represents commits number since last tag/branch update in code.

For example we have python-iso8601 package with code version = *0.1.10*

- package release = *1*,
- %{?dist} = Linux distro name(el7),
- MOS release = *mos8.0*,
- commits number into code within code version 0.1.10 = *1*.

Only packages from *security* repository should have security update
bundle number at the very end!

Regular packages should only have commits number for the very last
value in version string.

--------
Backport
--------

If package needs to be backported by any reason - name and version must be
kept. Modification required for *release* part, initial revision of a package
also should be preserved. Any further modifications of package will be
represented in commits number which follows after *mosX.X*. By default this
value will be always set to 1 and will be increased in case of package
modification.

Example::

    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7 ->
                                  python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.1
    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.1 ->
                                  python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.2

--------------
Package update
--------------

If required to update package SPEC file or add patch or make any other
modifications not related to code version update, package revision / release
number must be increased. If a major change (new version of the software being
packaged) occurs, the version number is changed to reflect the new software
version, and the release number is reset to 1. In case of packages maintained
by MOS this is **valid for OpenStack** projects.

For **non OpenStack** projects, like dependencies and back-ported packages all
updates will be represented in commits number part of release. After code
version update Commits number value resets to 1 and will be increased in cases
of further modifications of a package.

Update of dependencies within one code version(*non OpenStack*)::

    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.1 ->
                                         python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.2

Update of dependencies in case of code version update(*non OpenStack*)::

    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.1 ->
                                         python-iso8601-0.1.11-1.el7~mos8.0.1

Update of OpenStack project - SPEC changed::

    python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.123 -> python-heat-2015.2-2.el7~mos8.0.123

Update of OpenStack project - code tag/branch changed::

    python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.123 -> python-heat-2015.3-1.el7~mos8.0.1

----------------------------------------------
Versioning of packages in post-release updates
----------------------------------------------

**Updates:**

Since MOS reaches GA status, ie officially released, all updated packages will
be published into separate *updates* repository. Updated package will have
higher commit number value in the release part then package from stable
repository.

Example::

    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.200 ->
                                python-iso8601-0.1.11-1.el7~mos8.0.201
    python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.200 ->
                                python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.201

**Security updates:**

Security updates will also be published in a separate repository and based on
package from *updates* repository. Additional subsequent tag will be added to
the version of a package which includes ".sec." prefix followed by the security
bundle number.

Example::

    python-iso8601-0.1.10-1.el7~mos8.0.201 ->
                               python-iso8601-0.1.11-1.el7~mos8.0.201.sec.1
    python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.201 ->
                               python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.201.sec.1

**Work with branches within updates:**

Branches example:

- openstack-ci/fuel-8.0/stable - freezes after GA
- openstack-ci/fuel-8.0/updates - branch for maintenance updates between main
  releases
- openstack-ci/fuel-8.0/security-1 - branch for security updates

Any changes into *updates* and *security* branches are undergoing the full
acceptance cycle.

All *security* fixes should be proposed to particular branches called
"security-<id>" where ID corresponds to the number of a current update bundle.
These branches must be based on a particular commits that correspond to the
previously released version of a package. Such branches are generated each
time when a fix is based on a code released in terms of a current update
bundle.

Example for python-iso8601 0.1.10 package:

Stable branch::

    project: python-iso8601
    branch: openstack-ci/fuel-8.0/stable
    number of commits: 1
    tag: 0.1.10

After GA, *stable* branch should be frozen and do not accept any changes.
All further work is moving into "updates" branch, this means all next
maintenance updates will be published from this branch.

Updates branch::

    project: python-iso8601
    branch: openstack-ci/fuel-8.0/updates
    number of commits: 2
    tag: 0.1.10

In case of critical vulnerabilities found for project, the *security-1* branch
in the python-iso8601 project will be created, pointing to the same
commit from which the GA version of python-iso8601 was built. Patches will be
committed into the *security-1* branch, built package will be published into
security-updates package repositories and also pushed into *updates* branches
to keep these changes.

Security updates branch::

    project: python-iso8601
    branch: security-1
    number of commits: 2
    security update tag: sec.1
    tag: 0.1.10

Transformations within ongoing MOS releases as for dependencies as for
OpenStack projects::

   mos8.0:                  python-iso8601-0.1.10-1~mos8.0.1
   mos8.0:                  python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.1
   mos8.0-updates:          python-iso8601-0.1.10-1~mos8.0.2
   mos8.0-updates:          python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.2
   mos8.0-security-updates: python-iso8601-0.1.10-1~mos8.0.2.sec.1
   mos8.0-security-updates: python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.0.2.sec.1
   mos8.1:                  python-iso8601-0.1.10-1~mos8.1.1
   mos8.1:                  python-heat-2015.2-1.el7~mos8.1.1

All the current security fixes should be included into upcoming update bundle.
This means that if a new security fix gets into repository while new update
bundle is going through acceptance testing, the update bundle code should
include this fix, acceptance testing should be reset and new update bundle
should be retested again.

------------------------------
Prioritization of repositories
------------------------------

From out of the box *YUM* package manager has no ability to use repository
priorities. This functionality is accessible via yum plugin named
**yum-plugin-priorities** and accessible from Base repository. Also this
makes us able to use priorities for *Holdback* repositories.

---------------------------------
EXTRA_RPM_REPOS variable behavior
---------------------------------

In the current Fuel make system, the EXTRA_RPM_REPO variable is used to
specify one or more yum repositories to be used as additional sources
during creation of mixed repository that consists of MOS and upstream packages.

EXTRA_RPM_REPOS is a space-separated list of: name,url,priority

With the introduction of separate MOS and upstream repositories, the approach
to handling of the EXTRA_RPM_REPOS variable will change as well.

The following extra actions will be taken for each of yum repositories
specified in the EXTRA_RPM_REPOS variable:

* download to the local mirror created during an ISO build process using
  reposync tool from yum-utils, along with the respecive comps.xml
  Downloaded repository is placed to the $(LOCAL_MIRROR)/extra-repos/$reponame
  folder, where $reponame is the repo name taken from EXTRA_RPM_REPOS
* rebuild metadata with the createrepo command
* copy extra repository to the "extra-repos" folder in the ISO root
* add repo entry to the Fuel node kickstart file (ks.cfg) with the priority
  specified in the EXTRA_RPM_REPOS variable
* create extra.repo file in yum.conf(5) format to be used on the Fuel node

.. note:: In current implementation, source packages and debug symbols packages
   will be excluded during repositories download, to save diskspace on the ISO.
   Repositories metadata will be rebuilt automatically in order to keep the
   consistency.
   **Note** As this approach is not fully aligned with the artifacts separation
   strategy, it will be revised in the upcoming implementations.

Extra repositories added to the Fuel node kickstart, will be used both during
node provisioning, and node deployment.

--------------
Implementation
--------------

Assignee(s)
===========

Primary assignee:
  Vitaly Parakhin <vparakhin@mirantis.com>

QA assignee:
   TBD

Other contributors:
  TBD

Mandatory design review:
  Roman Vyalov
  Vladimir Kozhukalov

Work Items
==========

* Modify MOS mirroring Jenkins jobs

* Modify ISO creation Jenkins jobs

* Modify make system to allow Fuel node installation from multiple repositories


Dependencies
============

.. _separate_mos_from_linux: https://github.com/stackforge/fuel-specs/blob/master/specs/6.1/separate-mos-from-linux.rst

------------
Testing, QA
------------

TBD

Acceptance criteria
===================

* Fuel node can be installed from an ISO with multiple RPM repositories
* Only MOS RPM packages are stored on Fuel mirrors

----------
References
----------

TBD
